There is a diversity of choices to designate the autism spectrum so this paper will use the same terms as the quoted studies when describing background material to avoid misinterpreting that research. In the case of the online Aspie Quiz questionnaire, the terms neurodiversity and neurotypical are adopted as more convenient. In other cases, the use of ‘Asperger Syndrome’ (AS) is only applied when it corresponds to professional diagnoses. Since most studies use ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder) as the general term, it will be applied here in a similar way. ‘Neurotypical’ is a term invented in the autistic community, and also used in the Aspie Quiz, but not a scientific term typically used in autism research; it is used here as a convenience term to refer to ‘non-autistic’ subjects. Acronyms: ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder); AS (Asperger Syndrome); HFA (High Functioning Autism); PDD (Pervasive Development Disorder); NT (Neurotypical); ND (Neurodiverse) ; ToM (Theory of Mind); PD (Professionally Diagnosed).
Overview of current research
The cognitive science of religion has developed over the last 15 years a set of theories that some scholars consider already able to provide a ‘standard model’: religion would be built upon mental abilities used for different purposes from their original design; and these forms of cognition would often have adaptive relevance, especially enhancing internal group cooperation (Smith and Sankey 2012). Such a description renders a rather synthetic view of that field of research; however a more nuanced presentation should differentiate between adaptive theories and by-product theories, the 
field is currently split on these two ways of understanding religious phenomena.
A central tenet in this approach claims that the ‘theory of mind’ involves a capacity to conceive supernatural agents as being able to cause phenomena beyond the common traits attributed to ordinary subjects (Bering 2002; 2003; Barrett 2004).

The cognitive study of religion is much more than this. A clear development can be perceived after the first theories were launched two decades ago. A quick review of authors and published studies to date gives about 60 different proposals or attempts to display more scientific and naturalistic explanations of religion (Oviedo 2013). The study of subjects on the autism spectrum provides an excellent opportunity to test several of the new theories of religion; and particularly the ‘theory of mind hypothesis’ as it relates to religion. Furthermore, the study of religious cognition among these subjects along the autism spectrum could reveal important features regarding their own cognitive and behavioural structure, since religious experience implies different factors and variables across different individuals. Thus, we have the opportunity to  offer a set of new data in order to better understand religious cognitive systems.

The philosopher of science Robert McCauley in his recent book Why Religion is Natural and Science is Not (2011) devotes a long paragraph to the issue of autism and religious faith. His view oscillates between claims about the difficulties that people in such a condition meet in acquiring religious beliefs due to their supposed impairments in ‘theory of mind’; and the possibility of overcoming such apparent difficulties through different means. Even if they were to become religious, they would do so at a higher cognitive cost than neurotypical people, and probably their religion would have a different character (McCauley 2011, 252-268). 

To date several empirical studies have been conducted in order to gather evidence in support of ‘theory of mind's’ role in religion. Catherin Caldwell-Harris and her associates published a paper reporting significant variance comparing religious beliefs between persons with high functioning autism (HFA) and samples of neurotypical (NT) subjects from an internet discussion forum. A questionnaire helped to assess differences in a limited sample of subjects in both conditions (61 HFA vs. 105 neurotypical). They found that autistic people were more likely to be atheists or agnostics, and were more likely to build their own religious system (Caldwell-Smith e. A. 2011). However they suggest that some personality traits, beyond theory of mind, characteristic of these persons, could explain differences in religious faith.  Following a similar pattern, Ara Norenzayan and his associates also published the results of 4 empirical studies. In some cases the authors report that “the autism spectrum predicted reduced belief in God, and mentalizing mediated this relationship”. However in some of their studies the sample size was very small (12 Asp. vs. 13 neurotypical); in other cases the coefficients relating autism spectrum and belief in God were rather low. This impression was confirmed in a later study showing correlations between ‘mentalizing’ and ‘belief in God’ of just R= 0,1, even if significant, given the large sample size (N=492) (Willard, Norenzayan 2013).

Other published studies support suspicion regarding the intended correlation between variables of ‘theory of mind’ and ‘religiosity’. A study published in Dutch comparing ‘images of God’ and ‘existential theory of mind’ did not report significant correlations (Bouwman & Van der Maten-Abbink, 2008, as accounted in Hanneke Schaap-Jonker e. A. 2013, 6). More nuanced results are reported in an empirical study interviewing 4 young adults with Asperger’s Syndrome (AS), which questioned conventional views and asked if their religious cognition reflected a “specific cognitive styles or their cultural context” (Visuri 2012). Other empirical research with Jewish children and adolescents with high functioning autism showed that these subjects demonstrated, contrary to the hypothesis of some cognitive studies of religion, “belief in an agentive God who gives meaning to events in the world” (Brezis 2010, 192). This result could be accounted for based on the availability of ‘cultural scripts’. Other research based on some case studies points to creative and logically built forms of spirituality developed by people with AS (Dubin, Graetz 2009).

A more complex study did focus on the kind of God perception among people with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) (Schaap-Jonker, Sizoo et al. 2013). This fresh and detailed research shows the results of a survey of 78 cases with ASD, almost all of high religious profile in the Dutch Reformed Church (considering levels of Church attendance). Comparing with a sample of general population – but of the same religious denomination – the authors reported significant variations in their self-reported images of God as being somewhat more negative among autistic subjects. At the same time, religious saliency seems to be the factor mostly predicting religious positive feelings, while social impairment predicted more ‘anxiety towards God’. Their conclusion is that “This supports the hypothesis that the God image of people with ASD has a less reciprocal nature than the God image of people without ASD, especially those without any psychiatric disorder” (Schaap-Jonker, Sizoo e. A.. 2013, 156). However the authors concede that the autism related sample exhibits overall more positive than negative traits of God, and being much more religious than average. The described population within the broader autism spectrum, exhibiting high indicators of religiosity, projects some doubts on the views suggesting some type of  “religious disability” affecting autistic people.

A first impression after this review of recently published studies is that the issue is far from settled: it is not clear whether ‘theory of mind’ is related to or even necessary for one to have a belief in God. A more promising approach might rather look for specific traits among individuals on the autism spectrum regarding their religious beliefs. However, the research has not yet provided outcomes in which one can trace a proper mental religious system or structure in ASD population, which, in principle, might be very religious.

A big issue arising in research linking impairments in theory of mind and difficulties in religious cognition is the ongoing discussion about the role that theory of mind (ToM) really plays in autism and even more in AS (Baron-Cohen 1990). A considerable number of papers have been published in the last several years on this issue; a quick exploration of search engines shows a quantity of specialized experimental studies trying to better ascertain that link, or rather the actual absence of  in cases of autism. A comprehensive systematic review accounting for all this literature is still missing and it is badly needed.

On a very broad level several points might be highlighted after a general exploration of published studies on theory of mind and ASD. The general pattern emerging from most studies points to some form of impairment of theory of mind among subjects affected by ASD. However many nuances have been described in the course of the experimental research. ASD adults often manage to overcome that impairment through learning or other means, and are able to mentalize other people’s intentions. Furthermore several distinctions have been drawn regarding theory of mind, such as differences between implicit and explicit (Schneider, Slaughter e. A. 2013); cognitive and affective; advanced and simple (Mathersul, McDonald & Rushby 2013); existential and practical. All these nuances regarding theory of mind arise when ASD people are closely observed. Furthermore, theory of mind needs to be distinguished from similar abilities, like social affect (Smith, Hermelin, Tsimpli 2003); and emotional intelligence (Montgomery, Stoesz, McCrimmon 2012). Some studies go further to suggest that “Counter to what the ToM theory of ASD would predict, school-aged children and adolescents with HFA seem to be able to master the theoretical principles of advanced mental state reasoning” (Sheeren, de Rosnay et al.2013, 628). The conclusion of another study claims: “Given that ASD individuals show no deficiency in using their ToM in real interaction, it is unlikely that they have a systematically deficient ToM” (Begeer, Malle e. A. 2010, 104).

The current state of research does not as yet allow us to draw definitive conclusions regarding different forms of autism, theory of mind and religious cognition. However they invite us to take more cautiously the results of quoted studies on ASD and religion, and to momentarily suspend a hasty connection between a general concept of ‘theory of mind’, as experienced by ASD subjects, and particular forms of religiosity. The available studies suggest the need for a more complex research, able to account for the several forms that theory of mind assumes and their possible implications for religious cognition: the easy and simple way is no longer the more scientifically convenient.

The main hypothesis in this paper is that theory of mind is not a factor that influence the religious level of autistic people, or their final religious beliefs.  The paper further claims that autistic people experience religious cognition in some specific way in their own environment, but not so different from neurotypicals; that their specificity depends greatly on developmental, cultural and learning factors; and that this specificity is much more complex and subtle than the models exposed in recent research and theory building. To this end two strategies have been developed: an extensive online survey devoted to providing self-identification for neurodiverse people; and some preliminary field work with AS children schooled in standard schools. This last approach has produced two studies: one comparing “existential theory of mind” between neurotypical and AS school children in a questionnaire; and secondly, a qualitative survey of AS children.

Study 1
 Method and data collection
We used a popular online survey (Aspie Quiz, Ekblad, 2013) in this study. We exploited the high visiting rate by presenting volunteers with additional research questions. 
Aspie Quiz was constructed in an iterative process with factor analysis. It defined neurodiversity as the primary factor output by factor analysis of a data set of human behaviors which contains continuously distributed traits covering all human diversity. The secondary factor was named ‘neurotypicality’. The items in the final stage built on the evaluation of 1,800 items using a population of 550,000 individuals. Scores were calculated by using the factor loadings as weight factors. Factor loadings for the two factors were unrelated, but scores correlated -0.96. Because of this high dependency between the scores, the difference between the neurodiverse score and the neurotypical score was used to group the participants. A score difference above or equal to 35 was classified as neurodiverse (ND); a score difference below or equal to -35 was classified as neurotypical (NT); while scores in between were classified as mixed. The cutoff to neurodiverse was originally set so that 80% of diagnosed ASD would have their diagnosis confirmed. The Aspie Quiz was validated against Baron-Cohens Autism Spectrum Quotient and scores correlated 0.83. An item's relation to neurodiversity was called ‘the relevance estimate’, and was calculated as the correlation between answers from the neurodiverse and neurotypical groups. The Aspie Quiz used three answer alternatives (no, a little, yes) and had a no answer alternative that was checked by default. Unanswered items were excluded in the score calculation. (Ekblad, 2013). 
The experiments primarily used the neurodiverse and neurotypical group classification which a) have well-documented properties by using the Aspie Quiz scoring system, and b) do not rely on a single statement. We used the diagnosed ASD subjects mainly to check the validity of the findings. The ASD sample size is considerably smaller but still sufficient to detect large effects. If not stated otherwise the analysis is based on the Aspie Quiz score difference, hence all quiz-participants have been included. In other words, we refer to HFA as part of the neurodiversity spectrum – as this is the factor in the Aspie Quiz.  The window to the questionnaire was open for several weeks and 2139 cases were collected. Of these 128 (6%) were professionally diagnosed with AS/HFA/PDD; 678 (31,7%) self-identified as having autistic traits; and 1332 (62,3%) didn’t specify their position on the autism spectrum. The average age was 31 years, with a standard deviation of 14. Asperger diagnosed people were younger on average: 25 years. Participants to the Aspie Quiz were recruited through a large number of links on blogs, forums and autism community sites. No attempts were taken to recruit religious participants specifically.
The questionnaire was composed of 193 items, where 150 items were the standard Aspie Quiz items of which 5 were control items to check the honesty of answers. About 40 items were the adaptation for this particular sample to an original test designed to distinguish forms of institutional religiosity, spirituality, and moral attitudes, and previously administered to teenagers from 3 European countries, and thereafter standardized. 3 Items about beliefs in ghosts, paranormal experiences and sensitivity to electromagnetic fields were also added since these had been part of the Aspie Quiz previously and had shown interesting results. All the 193 items were presented in random order, so people could not guess the objective of the study. In order for the additional questions to fit into the Aspie Quiz naturally, and to be able to present them in a random order with the basic test, the same 3 answer alternatives were used for the additional items, and they were presented as direct personal questions. 
Results
To analyze the collected data, a first step was to reduce the variables in the part of questionnaire devoted to religion, spirituality and moral attitudes (43 items). To this end a factor analysis with Varimax rotation was applied. Eight factors have been extracted from the 43 items regarding religion, spirituality, and moral attitudes, with alphas above 0,5. In the order of importance or descending discrimination, the factors have been designed as follows:
F1: Spirituality (% var,: 17,47; alfa = 0,850)
F2: Confessional religion (% var.: 8,32; alfa = 0,852)
F3: Negativity (%var: 5,44; alfa = 0,683)
F4: Social Morality (% var.: 3,70; alfa = 0,654)
F5: Rationalism (%var 3,53; alfa = 0,590)
F6: Materialism (%var: 3,08; alfa = 0,603)
F7: Altruism (%var 2,58; alfa = 0,558)
F8: Justice (Fairness) (%var 2,73; alfa = 0,566)

The second step was to divide subjects between a group of neurotypicals and another of neurodiverse. Two procedures have been followed. The one simple assumed the variable based on self assessment of neurotypicals / and AS/HFA/PDD, plus those who have been professionally diagnosed with AS/HFA/PDD. The more complex procedure has applied the results of the Aspie Quiz score classifications. These two approaches allow us to compare tables of means and to better assess levels of cognitive diversity in their relationship with the extracted factors.

The third step was to calculate a cross-tabulation table for each procedure of discrimination allowing for diversity. In both cases the tables register the means of each factor for each sub-sample thus far obtained (see tables 1 and 2)

In both cases the contrast of means for each factor between neurotypicals (NT), and neurodiverse (ND) is quite revealing. The first result shows how the second table – one that can be considered as more reliable in assessing neurodiversity – confirms and even accentuates the results of the first table, based on self and professional assessment. The analysis of each factor shows other remarkable result.
The first factor, called “Spirituality”, clusters 8 items. The 6 with higher correlations are:
Do you believe in ghosts and / or supernatural phenomena? 
Have you had paranormal experiences? 
Do you think that living beings are connected in a mysterious way? 
Do you think that in this world, there is more than just what can be seen and felt?
Human beings have both a material and a spiritual component
The soul is immortal

The results show that people who do not suspect that they are on the autism spectrum get a mean of 1,56, while people that suspect they are on the autism spectrum get 1,69; and professionally diagnosed AS/HFA get 1,59. The variance between these three cohorts is rather scarce but significant (ANOVA p= 0,001) and people on the autism spectrum appear as having a little more “spiritual sensitivity” than others. This result is more evident in the second table: the contrast between neurotypicals (M= 1,52) and neurodiverse (M= 1,68) is still bigger (all the results are significant). 

A test with just the first two items of this factor is quite revealing. The items wording is: “Do you believe in ghosts and / or supernatural phenomena?”,  “Have you had paranormal experiences?”. [The cross-tabulation can be seen in Table 3]

Beliefs in ghosts and paranormal phenomena are significantly more prominent among neurodiverse than neurotypicals (M= 1,64 vs. 1,45); this tendency is even more evident regarding paranormal experiences (R= 1,46). These outcomes point to a greater sensitivity on the part of neurodiverse subjects towards the broad spectrum of spiritual and supernatural experiences.

The second factor clusters indicators of religious practice, like religious service attendance, personal prayer, and self-assessment as a religious person. Here again the means are similar, and the variance is small, but again significant and points to higher figures for people on the autism spectrum, who appear as ‘more religious’ following the indicators of institutional religiosity. In the second table these results are clearly confirmed (M= 1,50 vs. 1,39)

The third factor is the one with greater variance between these sub-samples; it is designed as ‘Negativity’ and clusters 8 items. The main ones are: 
Do you feel more compelled to do evil than to do good things?
Do you often have a reason to do evil things?
Do you sometimes perceive the dark side of reality that leads to evil?
Do you think that this life is nothing but a valley of tears?

In this case people on the autism spectrum clearly rank higher than others (Suspect= 1,51; Professionally diagnosed= 1,66; Don't suspect= 1,32; second table neurodiverse= 1,59; neurotypical= 1,28). This data might reveal a greater sensitivity within that sample towards forms of evil and negativity; or perhaps this sensitivity could be the consequence of their perception of their own diversity; or, alternatively, of being victims of bullying attitudes. 

The fourth factor measured attitudes towards social morality and corruption; the variance is not significant. The fifth factor is designed as ‘Rationalism’. From 6 clustered items, the main 3 are:
Do you often behave in a rational way?
Do you think that human beings know what is good and what is evil?
Do you think that if you know what ‘good’ is, then you can do it?

It is interesting that even if the variance is small, but significant, this factor reveals that people on the autism spectrum score a little lower than others (Suspect= 1,78; Professionally diagnosed= 1,76; Don't suspect= 1,90). This result could be understood as a difficulty by that sub-sample to recognize in an intuitive way the differences between good and evil and even to behave in a way that is not considered ‘rational’.

The factor 6, named ‘Materialism’ clusters 3 items describing human beings and their emotions just in physical terms. Here a contrast emerges between professionally diagnosed and the other two groups (Suspect= 1,56; Professionally diagnosed= 1,72; Don't suspect= 1,56). This variance is nevertheless not-significant; it could point to a small increase of materialism among ASD people in the way in which they understand human nature, but again the result is not conclusive.

The two last extracted factors, ‘Altruism’ and ‘Fairness’ do not offer substantial variation between the three sub-samples, and their reliability coefficient is lower and their ANOVA not-significant.

A preliminary conclusion of this survey is that mature subjects on the autism spectrum do not reflect relevant differences in the field of religion and spirituality compared to their neurotypical counterparts. Some nuances can be perceived, especially regarding the issue of negativity, which clearly shows a higher sensitivity on the side of autistic subjects; and a little more of a materialistic view of human nature.
Study 2
 Method and data collection

Following a suggestion from of Jesse Bering about “Existential Theory of Mind” (EToM) (Bering 2002; 2003) and its proposed central role in religious cognition, an empirical study was devised in order to test this hypothesis.  Bering describes EToM as “an independent system that, although built on the foundations of theory of mind, serves not to explain or predict behavior but, rather, to allow individuals to attribute meaning to certain classes of autobiographical experiences” (2002: 4). This move devolves religion to one of its most specific realms: a system of meaning. If Bering is right, and theory of mind is in the basis of this more sophisticated system, then deficits in that basic domain could affect the function of religion as a provider of meaning.

The first step was to compose an ad hoc questionnaire to check levels or areas involved in EToM. This questionnaire included 30 specific items, two items inquiring about levels of religious practice (church attendance and personal prayer); and the demographics of gender and age. This specifically designed questionnaire poses questions regarding perceptions of divine providence, the voice of conscience, or the ability to experience a transcendent meaning in life. The questionnaire did not intend to distinguish EToM as an independent variable regarding religious/spiritual beliefs, since this would become extremly difficult as, in principle, religious beliefs are in themselves part of that system of meaning. The scale of responses was reduced to three levels: ‘yes’, ‘more or less’, ‘no’, in order to simplify them and to adapt them to the capacity of a population of pre-adolescents and adolescents, allowing for the presence of some subjects with AS.

The questionnaire was administered at the end of 2010 to three different schools in Spain in three different regions, two of them Catholic, and the other public. This is a sample of convenience, based on direct knowledge after looking for schools with the presence of at last one student in AS condition.  The group’s ages were distributed as follows:
a) School 1a; 1 ESO; N= 30; age M= 11,9
b) School 1b;  4 ESO; N= 30; age M= 15,33
c) School 2; 1 ESO; N= 22; age M= 11,59
d) School 3; 6 Prim; N= 52; age M= 10,9
The first three groups of students had a boy in each class professionally diagnosed with AS.
Results
A factor analysis with Varimax rotation from the total of data was performed, and five factors have been extracted (alpha coefficients greater than or close to 0.5):
• God knows us, helps and protects
• God guides our conscience
• God neglects; is absent
• Religious practice
• Sense of providence despite the odds.

The comparative table of averages for the first factor shows that the perception of a God, who positively exerts its protective action, is quite high among members of these samples, and either declines significantly in the older segment or becomes negatively correlated with age (the students 15 years old perceive less of a sense of positive providence). No significant variations are recorded in this and other factors between boys and girls.

The most surprising result in this survey corresponds to the comparison between three cases of pupils with AS in two surveyed participating schools. In all the above described factors the AS boys reflect clearly the average in their perception of an existential theory of mind, or even above average regarding the neurotypical control group. This outcome contrasts with the idea that their difficulties in mentalizing or reading the minds of other people, renders them less sensitive from a religious point of view. An explanation for this could be that having received and internalized a strong religious background they have learned and memorized ideas like “God loves us, cares for us and protects us”, especially for individuals who may be in a more precarious condition due to their relational impairments. In fact the three cases involve children raised in religious or Christian families, and in two cases in Christian schools. Only one item with the expression: “There is an inner voice that tells me what is right and what is wrong” appears clearly in contrast with the average answers. The outcome could show a difficulty of AS school boys regarding such ‘inner voices’

The questionnaire should still be validated in a more extensive way so as to verify its ability to reflect the EToM in different settings. It should also be distributed to populations of adolescents and young people of different ages to see to what extent some predictions or hypotheses in the minds of the researchers are met. It appears that EToM works more vividly until a certain age, in around 12-13 years, in which individuals rather naturally attribute some abilities to influence life events, especially in a positive way, to the incorporeal and transcendent agency. In fact the negative experiences in this questionnaire are often not attributed to a supernatural agency. It is pertinent to conclude that the ability or tendency to attribute agency to supernatural beings decreases as individuals grow and develop other faculties that recognize the causality of a more immanent or rational agency.
Study 3
Method and data collection
For an entire year (2009-2010) two teachers in a Catholic school in Murcia (Spain) were contacted with the consensus of the school Director, after learning that they were teaching one child in each class diagnosed with AS. The interviews have helped to better ascertain the difficulties these boys of about 8 years of age were having conceiving of religious ideas and participating in religious activities. Some tasks have been suggested, such as writing a letter to Jesus, so as to assess contrasts between AS and neurotypical boys, after negotiating permission and ethical clauses with the School’s Technical Director. Occasional contacts with a psychiatrist working in this field and the mother with some children with AS diagnosis have helped us to understand, from a qualitative point of view, the specific traits of religious cognition and behaviour of children and adolescents with ASD.
Results
The main question arising from the meetings with the teachers was how to explain that despite the evidence pointing to some difficulties met by AS children to assume or interiorize religious beliefs – like for example, to understand the meaning of ‘religious representations or theatres’ – they could nevertheless, growing up, adapt to a religious environment without great contrast with the average population. Some answers emerged. One of the teachers suggested that these boys just learn social skills and routines, and once they are learned, they become rather comfortable repeating the same patterns of behaviour. Indeed her solution appeared very “behaviourist”, since she observes how the boy tries to deal with various problems and challenges in order to adapt to his social environment. Since he experiences troubles imagining alternative dimensions of reality from the point of view of a very rational mind, he tries to learn how to behave in a religious context, such as a religious service or public prayer. In that way he also learns how to behave in those settings, how to adopt praying postures, and how to respond to a series of stimuli during religious ritual. Probably learning has lent some meaning to all this, but it does not seem spontaneous or dynamic. However, in the teacher’s opinion, the process remains “behaviourist”, and hence lacking cognitive and emotional content.

The alternative possibility is that these ASD children, through their development, manage to “learn” the meaning of religious beliefs and behaviours through rational thinking. The process implies some steps, since the learning of an external habitus or set of routines could create progressive rational assumptions of rules and – at the very end – to a questioning that could in some cases affirm a rational view of religious faith and practice, i.e. an alternative approach to the one habitually used by neurotypical people, involving other cognitive and emotional resources.

A local psychiatrist and theology student in Murcia, who has treated many AS cases, thinks that these persons try to adapt to the social pressures of their environment, and taking part in religious rites and practices could be a way to gain social acceptability. In other words, the pressure to adapt in these cases comes from the social and cultural environment, which could explain the scarce difference between religious indicators of ASD and the average person.

A different insight comes from an interview with the mother of some children affected in a different way by AS. For many years she was a catechist or religion teacher of youngsters and noticed that her children with  more autistic traits needed to be more rational, and less ‘existential’ or ‘emotional’ with regards to a presentation of the contents of Christian teaching. In this case developing arguments rather than resorting to images or symbols would be a better strategy in order to transmit the meaning of Christian faith.

Regarding the proposed test of a “letter to Jesus”, the analysis of its content and comparison with the texts of the 2 AS children, offers some interesting insights. All the children in two classes completed the exercise (N= 48) with an average age of about 8 years old. Most of the children were addressing Jesus recognizing his excellent quality (35), thanking him for his gifts and greatness, and exposing their concerns and petitions. In many cases expressions of love towards Jesus were explicit (16). Only in two cases were expressions of deeper concern and willingness to inquire found, revealing some critical reflection and questions arising rather precociously. These cases even inquired about the consistency of the explanation about the Christian worldview they have received. One of these cases is a child with AS.

The two cases of students with AS showed in their texts evidence of distinctive traits compared to the average student. In the first case the orientation is clearly petitionary: a request concerning a very specific problem (leg pain), but then the child asks for all who need healing, which could be interpreted as a narrowing in the framework of representation of the person of Jesus. However, the final sentence “I love you very much and you are good because you love us” reflects an affective or empathetic level that would be less expected in this case, unless it has been learned and assimilated as the proper way to express religious commitment for a Christian boy in this context, or when they are invited to address Jesus. The second case is more reflective of characteristics of children with features of the syndrome: for example, a very brief text of five lines, unable to address Jesus in the second person. In the first part the subject makes a general statement about the properties of God: “God is kind, generous and a great person”. Then he asks: “I have a question: who created Jesus, Mary and God?” Formulate such a question in this context reveals the problems and concerns that this young student perceives as less clear dimensions of the origins of Jesus, and also the inquisitive and restless character of his mind, something that is not perceived in the rest of his group, except in a case in which another child takes the opportunity to pose a question about the meaning of evil in the world.
Provisional conclusions, future lines of research
This study reveals a more complex religious structure in the minds of subjects on the autism spectrum, and does not allow simplifications serving some theoretical programs. The general impression is that many autistic subjects suffer difficulties in adapting to the standard religious socialization characteristic of most children of their age. However these difficulties are overcome through specific ways, perhaps building some particular religious structure or code; and at the end what counts most is the social or cultural environment, which becomes the decisive factor leading to more or less religious attitudes and ideas. Therefore, developmental and social-cultural variables become more important than just innate cognitive features when predicting religious outcomes in these cases.  This conclusion finds some empirical evidence in the neurologic research of Bastiaansen and his associates (2011), which reaches the following conclusions: 
“Inferior frontal gyrus activity during the observation of facial expressions increased with age in subjects with autism, but not in control subjects. The age-related increase in activity was associated with changes in gaze behavior and improvements in social functioning” (…) The results of this cross-sectional study suggest that mirror neuron system activity augments with age in autism and that this is accompanied by changes in gaze behavior and improved social functioning”.

The thesis of religion in autistic subjects as mainly derived from social learning could mean that they would hardly generate religious ideas or experiences on their own This sort of ‘kick-off’ would be rather the patrimony of neurotypicals or of very creative minds. However, once in place, when religion becomes a trait of a human community, people with supposed impairments in their ‘theory of mind’, would just ‘adapt’ to the rest of the social group. This view is compatible with the hypothesis formulated privately by Justin Barrett: religion needs an initial ‘theory of mind’ to be started, and once on the move, it can assume forms which lack the contribution of that ‘theory of mind’, and even the emotional dimension. However this is a very theoretical and difficult to assess hypothesis. 

The problem with the former explanations is that secularized societies exert a rather low pressure regarding religious socialization. On the other hand neurotypical children would proceed in a similar way as everybody else learning and loosing their religious beliefs and practices at a more mature age; or they would just keep them because of social pressure or environmental adaptation. The available literature on the sociology of conversion points to such a pattern of acquisition and loss of religious beliefs and behaviours. Studies or data on possible conversions by autistic subjects are missing, and therefore any comparison at the moment is not possible.

The issue of the ‘behaviouristic explanation’ raises some questions. The questionnaires used in the first two studies included several items on religious sensitivity and views, which are harder to fake from a purely behaviouristic or learned position as some kind of ‘interiorization’ and reflection are required in order to consciously answer to them. It is difficult to settle these questions. Perhaps more interviews with autistic adults with religious beliefs and practices, able to reconstruct their own experience from infancy on, may help more when knowing how they managed to overcome the expected difficulties.

The discussion of this issue reflects a much broader issue: the role of external versus internal configuration of religious beliefs. Religious experience has been valuated more as a form of internal conviction and feeling, and less as something external, conventional, formal or just learned by means of environmental adaptation. However, this trend does not mean that the ‘ideal form’ of internal religion, corresponding to a strong intimate experience and feeling – within a Reformed and Enlightened tradition – is the only or the most genuine religious form, or that it could be claimed, in a kind of normative move, as being the best or the ‘authentic’ religious way. The idea of a pluralism of religious forms and developments emerges as very convenient in this context in order to avoid simplifications and reductions.

Several issues remain nevertheless unanswered in this brief and exploratory research. Indeed our initial study of this topic reveals the need for  much more work in this area. For example, the following would need future consideration:
From a neurological and cognitive point of view, it is difficult to assess the sorts of impairments and enhanced abilities on the autism spectrum and their own mental structure. Indeed a big problem arises when dealing with subjects positioned at different points on that spectrum, since those more severely affected suffer other cognitive impairments beneath problems of ‘theory of mind’. These aspects might add weight to their respective difficulties with religion. Therefore religious experience would depend on other cognitive faculties as well, which often remain affected in more severe forms of autism.
From a cognitive developmental point of view, it seems that autistic subjects and neurotypicals thread different paths towards their cognitive maturity, in integrating different skills, and balancing emotional and sheer cognitive aspects of their lives. That distinction applies to religious development too, and it would be important to track the specific path followed by ASD people, provided that there might be a unique path, which is rather less probable, knowing the many varieties and expressions that condition assumes.
From the point of view of a cognitive-cultural relationship, the case study of AS subjects provides interesting insights, but at the same time it appears as quite intriguing. It is clear from the evidence accumulated to date that those persons manage to adapt on average to their own environment, but it is hard to assess the way in which the cognitive structure and cultural context interact to achieve that outcome. The impression is that these are – not only in this case – very entrenched dimensions and that it becomes very hard to disentangle them in order to ascertain the specific contribution of innate cognitive traits. The most that can be expected is that neurotypicals and autistics work out the integration of mind and culture, not only regarding religion, in specific ways.
More promising ways to explore the specific structure of religious cognition by autistic people would be a study of their ‘religious grammars’ and the meaning they project into religious ideas and actions. In the first case, it would be insightful to assess whether they build on a different ‘religious grammar’ or apply a specific ‘set of codes’ that allow them to elaborate information susceptible to becoming ‘religious’ in its output. The evidence until now is very weak for a ‘universal religious grammar’. In the case that autistic people might apply similar or specific clues, they could help shed more light into this thorny issue. In the second case, the meaning ASD people project onto their own religious beliefs and actions could be revealing when compared with other forms of meaning-building of religious concepts, if religion is assumed as a “meaning system” (Emons & Paloutzian 2003; Silberman 2005)

All in all, there is still a long way to go until scholars are able to resolve several issues arising from the new scientific study of religion. The accumulated experience shows that reducing the variables too much does not help to gain a better scientific approach. The case of the use of autistic people should be less one of testing pre-existing theories, but rather one that could help to explore the richness and varieties of religious experience and cognition, as William James claimed. These varieties do not challenge scientific views but rather enrich our insights into this important dimension of the human condition.
